Rules API: Add docs (#457)
observatorium/observatorium: docs/design/rules-api.md

# Rules API

Observatorium is featured with a multi-tenant API that enables tenants to write and read Prometheus recording and alerting rules.

The API is [defined](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml) using the [OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/specification/) specification format.

The goal is to enable tenants to create, modify and access their own rules.

## Usage

### Create rules

> ```bash

Reviewer: The code block below is indeed she'll script, however this one is not. Maybe we should remove this language annotation

PUT /api/v1/rules/raw
```

Set rules for a tenant.

#### Example request

```bash
curl -X PUT --data-binary @alerting-rule.yaml --header "Content-Type: application/yaml" http://<observatorium-api-url>/api/metrics/v1/<tenant>/api/v1/rules/raw
```

Where:

* `rule.yaml` is a YAML file containing the desired rule definition. It can contain recording rules, alerting rules or both.

>   * *Note: For every `PUT` request, the content of the YAML file will be overwritten with the current content being sent.*

Reviewer: I'm worried this sentence may be a bit confusing for readers, but I'm not sure how to rephrase it.

Maybe:

Each time a PUT request is made, the rules contained in the request will overwrite all other rules for that tenant.

* `<observatorium-api-url>` is the URL where the Observatorium API is hosted.
* `<tenant>` is the tenant name

#### Example of a rule.yaml file

The `rule.yaml` should be defined following the [Observatorium OpenAPI specification](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml). The syntax is based on the Prometheus [recording](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) and [alerting](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/) rules syntax.

Example of a `rule.yaml` file containing an alerting rule:

```yaml
groups:
  - name: test-alerting-rule
    interval: 30s
    rules:
    - alert: HighRequestLatency
      expr: job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob"} > 0.5
      for: 10m
      labels:
        severity: page
      annotations:
        summary: High request latency
```

#### Example response

> ```bash

Reviewer: This one is again not bash

successfully updated rules file
```

| Status Code | Description                                                                                           |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 200         | Successfully listed rules.                                                                            |
| 401         | Error finding tenant/tenant ID.                                                                       |
| 500         | A server side error happened while trying to create rules or while trying to write the response body. |

### List rules

> ```bash

Reviewer: Same here

GET /api/v1/rules/raw
```

List rules for a tenant.

#### Example request

```bash
curl http://<observatorium-api-url>/api/metrics/v1/<tenant>/api/v1/rules/raw
```

Where:

* `<observatorium-api-url>` is the URL where Observatorium API is hosted.
* `<tenant>` is the tenant name

#### Example response

```yaml
groups:
- interval: 30s
  name: test-alerting-rule
  rules:
  - alert: HighRequestLatency
    annotations:
      summary: High request latency
    expr: job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob",tenant_id="1234"}
      > 0.5
    for: 10m
    labels:
      severity: page
      tenant_id: 1234
```

The response format is in `application/yaml`.

> *Note: In the current implementation from the Rules OpenAPI specification in Observatorium API, to better validate tenant rules, the label `tenant_id` was enforced in the read path:*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: In the current implementation from the Rules OpenAPI specification in the Observatorium API, to better validate tenant rules, the label `tenant_id` is enforced in the read path:*
```

# Rules API

Observatorium is featured with a multi-tenant API that enables tenants to write and read Prometheus recording and alerting rules.

The API is [defined](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml) using the [OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/specification/) specification format.

The goal is to enable tenants to create, modify and access their own rules.

## Usage

### Create rules

```
PUT /api/v1/rules/raw
```

Set rules for a tenant.

#### Example request

```bash

> curl -X PUT --data-binary @alerting-rule.yaml --header "Content-Type: application/yaml" http://<observatorium-api-url>/api/metrics/v1/<tenant>/api/v1/rules/raw

Reviewer 2: We should also mention something about authentication headers here.

Reviewer 3: I guess a common note saying that all these requests are tenant scoped and requires a valid auth token in the `Authorization` header would do the trick.

Author: good idea, added!

* `<observatorium-api-url>` is the URL where the Observatorium API is hosted.
* `<tenant>` is the tenant name

#### Example of a rule.yaml file

The `rule.yaml` should be defined following the [Observatorium OpenAPI specification](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml). The syntax is based on the Prometheus [recording](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) and [alerting](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/) rules syntax.

Example of a `rule.yaml` file containing an alerting rule:

```yaml
groups:
  - name: test-alerting-rule
    interval: 30s
    rules:
    - alert: HighRequestLatency
      expr: job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob"} > 0.5
      for: 10m
      labels:
        severity: page
      annotations:
        summary: High request latency
```

#### Example response

```
successfully updated rules file
```

| Status Code | Description                                                                                           |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | 200         | Successfully listed rules.                                                                            |

Reviewer 2: Do we get `Successfully listed rules.` after calling `PUT /api/v1/rules/raw` ?

Reviewer 2: Surely `successfully updated rules file`

Author: oops, yes that was a copy-paste error :sweat_smile: good catch, updated it :)

      > 0.5
    for: 10m
    labels:
      severity: page
      tenant_id: 1234
```

The response format is in `application/yaml`.

*Note: In the current implementation from the Rules OpenAPI specification in the Observatorium API, to better validate tenant rules, the label `tenant_id` is enforced in the read path:*

* *In the `labels` field and*
* *In the metrics that are present in the expression defined in the `expr` field.*

| Status Code | Description                                              |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| 200         | Successfully listed rules.                               |
| 401         | Error finding tenant/tenant ID.                          |
| 500         | A server side error happened while trying to list rules. |

## Difference between /api/v1/rules/raw and /api/v1/rules endpoints

Note that the `/api/v1/rules/raw` endpoint differs from `/api/v1/rules` endpoint:

* `/api/v1/rules/raw` supports `GET` and `PUT` requests, as described above. It refers only to the rules that were defined by the tenant that was authorized to use the endpoint.

> * `/api/v1/rules` supports `GET` requests and is the endpoint that is proxied by the Observatorium API to the read endpoint (in this case, Thanos Querier). It contains all rules from all tenants.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `/api/v1/rules` supports `GET` requests and is the endpoint that is proxied by the Observatorium API to the read endpoint (in this case, Thanos Querier). It lists rules that are currently being evaluated for the tenant.
```

We recently merged a PR that fixed the problem of listing rules for all tenants.

# Rules API

Observatorium is featured with a multi-tenant API that enables tenants to write and read Prometheus recording and alerting rules.

The API is [defined](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml) using the [OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/specification/) specification format.

The goal is to enable tenants to create, modify and access their own rules.

## Usage

> *Note: All requests to the endpoints below are **tenant scoped**; this means that each request requires a valid authentication token in the `Authorization` header.*

Author: I'm thinking if we have extra docs to link to this note?

* `<observatorium-api-url>` is the URL where the Observatorium API is hosted.
* `<tenant>` is the tenant name

#### Example of a rule.yaml file

The `rule.yaml` should be defined following the [Observatorium OpenAPI specification](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/main/rules/spec.yaml). The syntax is based on the Prometheus [recording](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) and [alerting](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/) rules syntax.

Example of a `rule.yaml` file containing an alerting rule:

```yaml
groups:
  - name: test-alerting-rule
    interval: 30s
    rules:
    - alert: HighRequestLatency
      expr: job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob"} > 0.5
      for: 10m
      labels:
        severity: page
      annotations:
        summary: High request latency
```

#### Example response

```
successfully updated rules file
```

| Status Code | Description                                                                                           |
|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | 200         | Successfully updated rules file                                                                       |

Author: ```suggestion
| 200         | Successfully updated rules file.                                                                       |
```
